---
tags: Journal, OpenSource, Licensing, Linux
---

# Sunday, January 31, 2021

## Open Source

Notes from Jeff Geerling's video on open source developments in early 2021. Link: https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=_0tIQlQhr00

- RedHat effectively killed CentOS
- Elastic effectively killed Elastic Search

"killed" is a bit strong in these 2 scenarios, it's much more complicated than that. It does mean that 2 large open source companies are showing that they were not able to sustainably monetize open source software.

## CentOS

RedHat was historically the poster child for how a company could monetize open source. This was likely a result of IBM buying RedHat and looking for ways to slash costs. "Realign cost centers with revenue centers" etc etc. CentOS 8 will be supported until the end of 2021. CentOS 7 support will end on June 30th, 2024. CentOS Stream will be the focus as the future upstream of RHEL.

From the website of CentOS Stream:

> Continuously delivered distro that tracks just ahead of Red Hat Enterprise Linux (RHEL) development, positioned as a midstream between Fedora Linux and RHEL. For anyone interested in participating and collaborating in the RHEL ecosystem, CentOS Stream is your reliable platform for innovation.
> https://www.centos.org/centos-stream/

It's basically a stable-beta version of RHEL, so not really recommended for production. Use case for CentOS Stream seem to be making sure that you can support future versions of RHEL. RHEL is making dev licensing less restrictive to try and compensate for that.

Rocky Linux is an attempt to reboot CentOS as a FOSS product.

## Elastic Search

Elastic Search switched from the Apache 2 license to the Server Side Public License (SSPL), which is also used by MongoDB. This is because AWS created their own hosted Elastic Search offering, which competes directly with how Elastic monetized Elastic Search. The Open Source Initiative has an article on why [the SSPL is Not and Open Source License](https://opensource.org/node/1099).

> We’ve seen that several companies have abandoned their original dedication to the open source community by switching their core products from an open source license, one approved by the Open Source Initiative, to a "fauxpen" source license. The hallmark of a fauxpen source license is that those who made the switch claim that their product continues to remain "open" under the new license, but the new license actually has taken away user rights.
> 
> [...] Elastic, in a post it unironically titled "Doubling Down on Open," Elastic says that it now can "restrict cloud service providers from offering our software as a service" in violation of OSD6.

OSD6 refers to item 6 of the Open Source Definition (OSD), which states:

> **No Discrimination Against Fields of Endeavor**
> 
> The license must not restrict anyone from making use of the program in a specific field of endeavor. For example, it may not restrict the program from being used in a business, or from being used for genetic research.

AWS forked Elastic Search in response, splitting off a new product from the last version of Elastic Search that has an Apache 2 license. Now there's 2 products.

## The Problem for Everyday Devs

The problem is essentially that developers who contributed unpaid work to a project that changes their license can essentially be barred from using future releases of the software in certain settings, thereby preventing them from using software that contains code that THEY wrote. "Thanks for the code! We're going to profit off of it now and pay you nothing. Also you can't use it. Also you can't build a business off of it."

## Questions

- How do we ensure that developers can make a career from open source?
- How do we keep monolithic hosting providers from taking advantage of free software? AWS and Azure and GCP can just take open source license, box it up as a managed service, and contribute NOTHING back. Then when FOSS companies want to get what's due, the cloud providers can just fork the project and tell the FOSS maintainers to get bent.
- How do we mitigate license changes with FOSS that we depend on?
- What are options for building a company around FOSS?

Maybe blindly adopting permissive open source licenses invites more corporate ownership of software.

> Wish **I** had a billion dollar venture-backed startup.
> -Every developer ever.

## How Does Open Source Actually Work?

- There are a bunch of open source licenses that are 
    - MIT is a "do whatever you want"
    - Apache is a "do whatever you want but don't sue me"
    - GPL is "do whatever you want but it also has to be open source". Big companies hate this license because it restricts their ability to be parasites.
- There's also contributor licenses, which is the reverse of a project license, where effectively your contributions to a FOSS product are under a license.
- Monetization?
    - Organic marketing
    - Consulting
    - Premium support contracts
    - Offer a hosted service (Elastic Search, Wordpress)
